[Unknown]: IVM.
[Amit Varma]: Before we move on with this episode of the scene in the unseen, do check out another awesome podcast from IVM podcast, Cyrus Says, hosted by my old buddy, Cyrus Brocha.
[Amit Varma]: How should we treat other people? How should we behave in society? When I first started thinking about this seriously, I was drawn to the second formulation of Kant's categorical imperative. Never treat another person as a means to an end, but as an end in themselves. That is, respect every individual's autonomy and agency. Don't think what use they can be to you. Now, this is obviously easier said than done, and might even be impossible.
[Amit Varma]: There's a natural limit to how many people we can regard as worthy of our moral consideration, and our relationship with everyone else is transactional. We try to get as much out of them as we can, as if we are at a sabzi mandi and driving the hardest bargain. Maybe we are driven purely by biological instincts, and all our so-called civilized behavior is just a performative veneer. Even if that is so, I would say that in this case, performative is a good thing.
[Amit Varma]: If all of us even pretended to respect other people, and not treat them as a means to an end, the world would be a better kind of place. But we couldn't be further away from this. One of the things that the MeToo movement makes clear is that men always treated women as a means to an end. This includes women who are strangers, women at our workplace, women who are friends, even women in our families. And I'm not just talking about the obvious illustrations of this, of using women for sex, or as live-in housemates.
[Amit Varma]: In a million insidious ways, women are treated as second-class citizens, diminished in countless ways, constantly shown their place. And this is so normalized that we take it for granted, and we don't even question our behavior. That's why for me, MeToo is so important. It puts this behavior in the spotlight. Not just obvious crimes like sexual assault, but casual, everyday sexism that is reflexive to all men, including me.
[Amit Varma]: This is the most important cultural moment of our lifetimes. And I believe that despite all the turmoil now, in fact, because of all the turmoil, it will make the world a better place.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science. Please welcome your host, Amit Badma. Welcome to The Scene and The Unseen. My guests for today's episodes are two remarkable journalists, Supriya Nair and Nikita Saxena. Despite my brief rant in the intro, I promise I'll spend most of this episode shutting up and just listening to them, as I think most men should do.
[Amit Varma]: To briefly introduce my guests, Supriya Nair is a journalist I've known for a while. Welcome to the show, Supriya.
[Guest 1]: Hi, thank you for having me, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Nikita Saxena works at the independent magazine, The Caravan, and a couple of years ago wrote a brilliant long read report for them about RK Pachauri. Welcome to the show, Nikita.
[Guest 2]: Thank you for having me.
[Amit Varma]: Nikita, I want to start this episode by talking about that report of yours. But before we begin, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Like me, are you someone who loves fine art, but can't really afford to have paintings by the artists you like hanging on your walls? Well, worry no more. Head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors is a company that licenses images of the finest modern art from some of the best artists in India and adapts them into objects of everyday use.
[Amit Varma]: These include wearable art like stoles and shrugs, home decor like cushion covers and table runners, and accessories like tote bags. This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at an accessible price.
[Amit Varma]: And artists get royalties on sales, just like authors do.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, Indian Colors now has an exciting range of new products, including fridge magnets with some stunning motifs, and salad bowls and platters made of mango wood.
[Amit Varma]: Their artists include luminaries like Babu Xavier, Vazvo X Vazvo, Brinda Miller, Dilip Sharma, Shruti Nelson, and Pradeep Mishra.
[Amit Varma]: They accept bulk orders for corporate and festival gifting, but even if you want to buy just for yourself or a friend, head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: That's colors with an O-U. And if you want a 20% discount, apply the code IVM20. That's IVM for IVM podcast. IVM20 for a 20% discount at IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm Vishupriya Nair and Nikita Saxena. Nikita, I loved your report on Pachauri when it first came out.
[Amit Varma]: And when I was reading it again today morning, it struck me that much of what you describe in that story is universally true of our culture.
[Amit Varma]: The work environment where sexism is normalized, the persistent patterns of psychological and emotional manipulation, as you put it,
[Amit Varma]: the gaslighting of the victims where they are made to feel as if there is something wrong with them and they are overreacting,
[Amit Varma]: the act of victimhood by the accused when they are confronted with their actions, the use and misuse of power, which proves a dictum that power always corrupts.
[Amit Varma]: What was it like reporting on the story for you as all these layers revealed themselves?
[Guest 2]: So the story initially had sort of taken form at the time that the case that one of the survivors had filed in 2015 sort of started getting attention.
[Guest 2]: And Raghav Ory, who was the journalist from Economic Times who broke the story, had doggedly been following it.
[Guest 2]: And the idea initially was just to see in a short report what this journey for someone who tried to take recourse through due process looked like.
[Guest 2]: I think by day two, we had a sense that we were actually looking at a way larger story.
[Guest 2]: And for me, I think you really do not anticipate the kind of challenges you are going to be facing on reporting a story that has such direct repercussions for you.
[Guest 2]: Because as a woman, to be reporting on multiple stories of sexual harassment also meant for me that I was revisiting a lot of my professional and personal experiences
[Guest 2]: that I had for the longest time kept buried, which was not comfortable at all.
[Guest 2]: But in a way, it also meant that with each interview, I was privileged with information and insight that I did not have earlier that also helped me navigate this space on my own.
[Guest 2]: And I'd like to think that I was able to use that insight to report the story better.
[Guest 2]: The other thing was just the repetitions and patterns to the point that it was almost banal.
[Guest 2]: And that was what surprised me after a point because I remember sitting when I was just going to start writing.
[Guest 2]: I sat with all the transcripts of my interviews and I'd done multiple interviews.
[Guest 2]: And after a while, all of it on my desk started looking the same because he was following the same pattern with all of these women.
[Guest 2]: It could have been at different points of time. There could have been different ways to enter the equation.
[Guest 2]: But largely, when you sort of looked at it from the top, it didn't look very different.
[Guest 2]: So, you know, one of the things was, for example, the young women that he chose to prey on or women who were coming from situations that would make them perceivably more vulnerable.
[Guest 2]: So to kind of make use of the insecurities that professional women are anyway coming in with at any office.
[Guest 2]: And this is something I think about often that it so happened that this story was of Terry.
[Guest 2]: But the idea that men who make sexist jokes, who are known to make what they loosely call passes at women, which is such a trivialization of what actually happens.
[Guest 2]: We all know those people in our offices and we all know men who condone those jokes.
[Guest 2]: And we all have been complicit in not supporting women who may have wanted to come out with these complaints earlier.
[Guest 2]: And I think that's a larger problem, not just a Terry problem.
[Guest 2]: To come back to Pachauri, I mean, you know, so one was that you would see that there were a lot of young women that he decided to act as a mentor to.
[Guest 2]: And for me, that was personally the most corrupting part of it.
[Guest 2]: Right. Because all of these women would enter into their interactions with him, believing that they're being approached because of their intellect or because of what they bring to the organization.
[Guest 2]: And then to be dehumanized at the point that you realize that it is all so that this man can approach you with, you know, a sexual intent or a gendered intent.
[Guest 2]: I think to be to be listening to the recollection of that was the hardest, because that betrayal of trust or the betrayal of the idea that you were worthy of the attention, intellectual and professional of a man who you deeply admired isn't comparable.
[Guest 2]: And that's the part, sorry, that I think we tend to overlook when we're talking about sexual harassment.
[Guest 2]: It's not just the physical, you know, it's not just the physical transgressions. It's also the the breaking of the confidence of a woman trying to reinforce the idea that you are always going to be your gender.
[Guest 2]: Sorry, Supriya, I think you were saying.
[Guest 1]: I had a question. Can you tell us how many women you spoke to approximately through the course of the story?
[Guest 2]: So I spoke to about 50 to 60 people for the story in its entirety and apart from three women, including the main complainant who had already put out their versions, either through a legal complaint or through open letters.
[Guest 2]: I spoke to six women who were survivors. And this was over the course of the 30 years that Terry had started.
[Guest 2]: So the oldest employee, so to speak, that I spoke to was someone who worked in Terry in the early 90s.
[Guest 2]: So we're also talking about something that was allowed to continue for very long, for way longer than it should have.
[Guest 2]: And the kind of devastation that this leaves the women with, you know.
[Guest 2]: So, for example, I remember one woman telling me that she went into another office after she left Terry and she remembered immediately noticing that there are a lot of women in that office and that the boss is male.
[Guest 2]: And she said, I was immediately distrustful. And as it turned out later, there was no reason for her to feel that way.
[Guest 2]: But that's how the alarms went up, because that's what had been conditioned into her after her time at Terry.
[Guest 2]: And so much of it was so textbook. Right. So he would, you know, tell the women about how smart they were, how far he wanted to see them go.
[Guest 2]: Then he would start talking to them about his marriage and there would be conversations about how it was failing, you know, how he really was not comfortable with the kind of equation he had with his wife.
[Guest 2]: And it was a big decision for me to think over whether or not I wanted to put it into the story, because on some level, it does feel unfair to me that almost always we tend to put the spotlight on the women associated with men.
[Guest 2]: Which is not to say that it's not justified, but sometimes we tend to put that spotlight more on the women than the accused themselves.
[Guest 2]: But it seems so intrinsic to his modus operandi. And I remember reading his book, this terrible book called Return to Almora, which got really famous for its I mean, it was talked about a lot because it has a lot of very badly written sex scenes.
[Guest 2]: But that part is actually the least interesting part of the book. I think he meant for it to be autobiographical, semi autobiographical in nature.
[Guest 2]: That's the sense one gets as a reader. And there are parts of the book in which he's almost describing the modus operandi to you because there's an instance in which the protagonist, you know, fleeting love interest who makes an appearance in and out of the book has fallen in love with an older man.
[Guest 2]: And there is an entire paragraph that I remember reading in which Pachori has written about how this older man had probably gotten her, you know, this naive young girl to fall for his advances because he gave her the same tired old story about a broken marriage.
[Guest 2]: And at this point, I know what he's done with the survivors themselves. And I thought it was almost revoltingly self-aware, you know.
[Guest 2]: And so there was that then he would isolate them. And that's, again, so dangerous because you're basically consciously cutting off channels for these women to reach out to.
[Guest 2]: If I don't have colleagues, I can trust if I'm constantly being told that, you know, everyone out here is not looking for your well-being, but I am.
[Guest 2]: You're also making sure that these women are going to ask themselves 10 times more whether or not they want to alienate the only supposed ally, who also happens to be the boss of this organization, who also happens to be the chair of the IPCC that has won a Nobel under him.
[Guest 2]: Do I really want to cross paths with him? And maybe I'm getting this all wrong because, you know, he's been looking out for me this entire time.
[Guest 2]: And that's when he would move into the territory of using this amplified vulnerability to justify his abhorrent actions, either the verbal comments he made or the kind of physical advances he thought it was kosher to make.
[Guest 2]: By this time, even if the women are sure and they know what's happening, you're also aware of the power of this man.
[Guest 2]: You've kind of seen it through the course of the grooming that he's put you through. In some cases, he would ask to meet their parents.
[Guest 2]: You know, and one woman said that I was sure he did this to give me the sense that if I can't even talk to my parents, then, you know, where am I going to go?
[Guest 2]: And that grooming is something that, you know, people who are child abusers do with children so that the children do not feel comfortable confiding in their parents about their experiences.
[Guest 2]: And then, of course, there were the threats. There were decisions to take away work. There was the demeaning of the women's professional abilities, the objectification of them as women who invited this upon themselves.
[Guest 2]: And this is, again, a really interesting defense that I see with especially men in positions of power who decide to sexually harass women.
[Guest 2]: You made me do this. I can't take control of my feelings because you just, you know, you've, I, you kind of put the responsibility back on the woman for how she has filled you with passion that you didn't know existed.
[Guest 2]: I mean, it's part of a template, but, you know, the women are made to feel like this is a unique case and somehow they are to blame for it because they're, you know, you were just so beautiful that I didn't know what else.
[Guest 2]: Root has never happened to me before. And now, because these women are not speaking to each other, because that's the structure you've consciously created, in most cases, they're not even sure that this is a part of a template.
[Guest 2]: Or even if they could have some idea, they don't know if they are going to be able to confirm that suspicion.
[Guest 2]: And then also comes the part about, you know, playing up both what you could bring to their life, the havoc they are creating supposedly on your life and what you could do to them if they do decide to speak out.
[Guest 2]: And this is said in insidious ways. Right. And the funniest part for me in a very bizarre way of all of this was that finally, after I was done reporting a few days before the story went to press, I did end up meeting Mr. Pachauri.
[Guest 2]: And I felt like I was meeting someone I knew already, you know, because I'd just been thinking about him for so long.
[Guest 2]: And there were things that I knew he did with other women that I saw him doing with me. And I was a journalist. He knew that he was talking to me on the record.
[Guest 2]: I had a recorder switched on in his presence. And I remember that the minute I sat down and there was a photographer who was with me.
[Guest 2]: He said, before we start the interview, can I just can I ask you something naughty? And I just thought that was fantastic, because how can you be so audacious?
[Guest 2]: You know, I mean, and after which, for example, there were these things he would do. This was also a man who was obsessed with the idea of power, very much like a lot of men that we know in these positions.
[Guest 2]: And one of the projections of that was to talk often about his cricketing prowess as a way to talk about his virility.
[Guest 2]: Or he had this very strange habit of getting back toiletries from his trips abroad, which people in Delhi would go to collect, because that was the kind of cult he had created.
[Guest 2]: During the interview, at some point, he did start talking about his cricketing ability.
[Guest 2]: He didn't ask you any naughty questions?
[Guest 2]: The naughty question was what Pranoy Roy's reaction to the NDTV story was, which I thought was quite boring. I mean, it was not naughty at all.
[Guest 2]: You were disappointed?
[Guest 2]: Yeah, I mean, I wasn't disappointed. I just thought that I'm talking to someone who really lacks in awareness about how they are to conduct themselves, considering he had a very, very public sexual harassment case being filed against him because of which he had lost professional opportunities.
[Guest 1]: I don't know if it was the lack of self-awareness. It just sounds like a marvellous confidence.
[Guest 2]: It is. It is. And I think just the idea that you can get away with this because you've been getting away with it for so long, you can't envisage a scenario within which you will not.
[Guest 2]: I mean, think about it. Someone who's done this for 30 years. This is behaviour. I mean, this is your nature now. You don't know how else to be, I think.
[Amit Varma]: And what I found as disturbing in your account as these patterns of behaviour is the fact of how other people looked upon them.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you've quoted someone talking about him and talking about Mr. Pachauri and saying, oh, he's a man of colourful messages.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and they'll talk about him affectionately and how he plays the field and he has a roving eye and all that, as if all of that is OK and it's standard and that's what you expect and kind of.
[Amit Varma]: I imagine at some level, like what is disturbing is that these patterns of behaviour were probably known to a lot of his colleagues and they didn't find it wrong.
[Amit Varma]: And perhaps therefore, he had the confidence to behave like that even when you went to interview him, because he didn't find it problematic either.
[Guest 1]: I wonder if that's true of the reactions of a lot of men who are watching what is happening in these days and weeks and who sense that something big is going on,
[Guest 1]: but aren't quite able to understand why, I think even more than the hashtag MeToo, why women are saying time's up.
[Guest 1]: I don't think anybody gets that there's a ticking clock. And Amit, maybe you know something about this because you occupy spaces that Nikita and I, by virtue of our gender, don't necessarily do.
[Guest 1]: And I really want to ask you and Nikita, I want to talk about what men are thinking at this time.
[Amit Varma]: I think many men are shaken up, but most men are largely in denial. It's almost as if, hey, women are overreacting. What's the big deal?
[Amit Varma]: And people will point out, again, a point that I'll bring up later about that, hey, there's a spectrum of abuse and some people are assaulters,
[Amit Varma]: but a lot of these are bad dates or somebody cracking a bad joke on a date. And my point, and this is not a view I would have held, I think, 10 days ago.
[Amit Varma]: But my point, I think one realization that I'm coming to is that this MeToo movement is not about the sexual assaults or crossing clear lines of consent.
[Amit Varma]: Everyone agrees that is wrong. It's about patterns of sexism in our behavior, which are so normalized that we don't even know.
[Amit Varma]: Like the classic example of that would be if you're in a mixed group, making jokes with sexual innovators, which are perfectly fine.
[Amit Varma]: And then gaslighting the women if somebody protests and saying, oh, you know, you're too sensitive and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And one thing I realized, and I did an episode with the three of the women who work at Takshashila a couple of weeks back on the metrics of empowerment.
[Amit Varma]: How can we figure out how women are getting empowered? And one revelation that kind of came up there was that every single moment of my life, my maleness doesn't matter to me.
[Amit Varma]: I take my gender for granted. It is not a factor in how I interact with people. It's the exact other way around for women.
[Amit Varma]: Every single moment of your time as a woman, your gender is a factor. You're getting onto a local train. You're getting into a restaurant.
[Amit Varma]: You're talking with a man in a cafe. It is a factor. And therefore, this makes it imperative on men to make sure that they are cognizant of this.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, that they make that extra effort and apply that filter to make sure that women are not uncomfortable in any way in their presence,
[Amit Varma]: which could be something as simple as making sure that you change the kind of humor that you do in mixed company, which could be something as sort of simple.
[Amit Varma]: Let's say, for example, you know, as a middle aged man, I grew up in the 80s and the 90s and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And the norms of how you greet women have changed. Earlier, you would just nod or some circles to a namaste, then you shook hands.
[Amit Varma]: Now you hug and all of that, which I found very awkward to navigate. So the best solution, I think, for any man in that case is if you're meeting a woman in a social setting,
[Amit Varma]: just let her make the first move. You know, just go with that. Just I mean, this sounds very sort of masculine.
[Amit Varma]: But think of it as a game theory problem that I will optimize my behavior in such a way that the chance of the woman feeling uncomfortable is minimized.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something that I don't think men get that they behave in ways they think are normal and they don't understand the reactions of women.
[Guest 1]: I don't think game theory is masculine. I mean, I know that.
[Guest 1]: I'm also sorry. I also noticed that even though I met and I have known each other for years today, he waited for me to hug him.
[Unknown]: I appreciate that. And I also appreciate what you're saying.
[Guest 1]: I realize that behavioral boundaries change and that it's as difficult for men to navigate as women in many ways.
[Guest 1]: But one of the things I think many of us have realized or under underscored for ourselves in the last few days is that women have to bear the brunt of that to an unimaginable extent.
[Guest 1]: And one of the things that frustrates me is that the sort of radical empathy that this confessions and this discourse is generating among women for each other doesn't seem to have reached men.
[Guest 1]: And I feel like the onus is on on men to if you if you can't feel our pain, quote unquote, at least recognize that what your discomfort is and do something productive with it instead of brushing it under the carpet and waiting for all of this to go away.
[Amit Varma]: And that's doubly ironic, because in the world that we are in, it's the unfortunate fact that men make more of a difference to these things than women do.
[Amit Varma]: So it's incumbent on men to speak up, which is therefore the dilemma I also face. You know, I was asked to write a piece about this for the Hindu, which I'll probably write tomorrow.
[Amit Varma]: And the dilemma I face is that men speaking out the danger you're in is you could be virtue signaling, which we see a lot of, or you could be making it about yourself suddenly, which again, men tend to do.
[Amit Varma]: But it is about men. Yeah, but you know, in a different way, as if you're showing how compassionate you are and how enlightened you are and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a danger you face. But at the same time, it's it's the men also have to speak up. And I think a few have,
[Guest 2]: I think one of the conversations that I'd like to hear from men instead of, you know, for example, when the entire thing had started, and it started with someone from the comedy circuit sort of being, you know, held accountable for a lot of his harassment.
[Guest 2]: What I would have liked to really hear is from other comedians exactly how they thought they were complicit.
[Guest 2]: And I think one of the issues with men when they do decide to speak about this is that we don't hear often enough of how they are holding themselves accountable.
[Guest 2]: And even now, I feel like I see a lot of women doing this introspection, you know, the ways in which we have enabled environments that we feel unsafe in enabled men who we are now recognizing have done many problematic things.
[Guest 2]: And what is it that we need to change to make this better? Because really, what something like this is asking of all of us is to be better people is to be more kind, more compassionate, more considerate.
[Guest 2]: And that kind of goes against everything that we've been, you know, societally or individually conditioned with.
[Guest 2]: And I think that that's incumbent on both men and women. But even now, along with the kind of trauma that reliving this kind of abuse brings with it and reading stories of it brings with it, I still see more women at least thinking out loud about the ways in which they could have contributed.
[Guest 2]: And I feel like most of the men I am hearing from are either completely detached in the way that they're saying that we see that this is happening to you, whereas this is happening to all of us, you know, when creating safer environments for all of us.
[Guest 1]: I really felt the truth of what you tweeted yesterday. Could you repeat it?
[Guest 2]: I think it was something on the lines of, you know, women are going about their daily jobs, they're grappling with anxiety and guilt, they're collating these lists, they're responding to legitimate criticisms of what's happening.
[Guest 2]: And on top of this, they're all checking in on each other, you know, like, I think I've spoken to more women in the past four or five days than I had in months.
[Guest 2]: And I love it because they're all constantly checking in on whether you've eaten, have you had enough water? Are you getting enough rest? Are you taking care of yourself? Switch off when you need to.
[Guest 2]: And I had a conversation with Supriya right after I came to Bombay. And it was the first time I was actually speaking to someone about what had happened because I'd been traveling for work.
[Guest 2]: And I just felt such a great amount of comfort. And from men, I just want so much as a, you know, how are you doing? I hope you're okay. And I'm not even hearing that much.
[Guest 2]: And that for me personally is really frustrating.
[Guest 1]: I respect the silence of a lot of men I know who may be thinking about this deeply, or who may feel uncomfortable or feel like it's not their place.
[Guest 1]: And I get why men feel like it's not their place to intrude on a conversation that women are having.
[Guest 1]: But without pointing fingers, I also want to say that there is a certain kind of silence that is a complicity of its own.
[Guest 1]: And if it's the silence that means that you're waiting for something to blow over, or that means that you can't condemn obviously unsavory behavior or that you can't condemn misconduct, because you're thinking back to something you've done yourself.
[Guest 1]: And thinking, oh boy, now I really can't say I'm sorry about this, because this is how I behave too. Then, then you know, there's work to be done over there as well.
[Amit Varma]: But going back to what Nikita said about women talking more to each other, and you know, that kind of shared.
[Amit Varma]: Is this in that sense, a watershed moment in the sense that earlier if something happened, a woman felt she had no choice but to keep quiet, let it pass, get over it, move on to the next moment.
[Amit Varma]: But now they feel the solidarity and because other people are speaking up, they feel that they can speak up as well.
[Amit Varma]: Only if the, you know, one person accuses man X, nine other people will feel emboldened by that and come out. And is that happening?
[Guest 1]: I think one way I would qualify that is that the number of women involved in this conversation is still very small, and that it's very stratified.
[Guest 1]: We know that there are women in smaller towns who speak languages that aren't English, who aren't upper caste or upper class, have constraints that are unimaginable to those of us who are speaking up or participating, or even just reaching out to each other.
[Guest 1]: To the second part of your question, I'm, because there's more data out in the environment now, I think we can say that the conversation has broadened.
[Guest 1]: I don't know if this is wholesale different from how women spoke to each other. The phrase the whisper network has come up very often in the last few days.
[Guest 1]: And that hints at this sort of unstructured, private way in which women spoke to each other, warned each other of men or institutions that they knew to be problematic.
[Guest 1]: What I think has changed, though, is a new awareness of a pattern. And I think an underlining of the fact that none of what happened to us or our friends was okay.
[Guest 1]: I can't tell you the number of times I have seen a story about a prominent man come out on Twitter and think, holy crap.
[Guest 1]: My friend told me the same thing about the same man, except that instead of happening to her at a conference in Goa, it happened at a party in Delhi. So this is a pattern of misbehavior.
[Guest 1]: The difference is that when my friend told me the same story, I felt bad for her. I filed it away as a black mark against the man in question, and I moved on.
[Guest 1]: And now I realize that that it was far from an isolated incident. And the patterns are becoming really clear to me. And that, I think, shows me about the breadth of the problem.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, before you guys got here, my producer Swati was telling me about how there haven't been any me too from Hindi journalism or language journalism.
[Guest 2]: I think there are some regional journalists who are coming out. And I think Supriya Sharma had a fairly interesting sort of insight on this, which is that the kind of concerns that women in English language media were facing, you know, a few decades ago.
[Guest 2]: There are a lot of journalists in smaller cities and towns who are still facing those concerns. And I think, like Supriya was pointing out, I think, I don't know if this is a watershed moment.
[Guest 2]: I think this was something that has been in the making for many months, if not years now. So, for example, even the idea of naming predators first came with Losha, the list that Raya kind of collated.
[Guest 2]: Should we introduce that list? Yeah, sorry. So there was basically Raya Sarkar, who at that time, I think, was a law student, had put together a list of men in academia who are known to be predators based on complaints that she was receiving.
[Guest 2]: And at that time, the list had generated a lot of controversy. And that's why I think there is a need to introspect on how we look at this particular moment as being unique, because I'm not sure that it's unique.
[Guest 2]: I think it's broadened the scope in terms of the conversations that are happening. But even that broadening should be, I mean, we should look at that broadening with some amount of skepticism, because I think what had happened at that time was not very different from what is happening now in the methodology.
[Guest 2]: I mean, here also, there are women who are either choosing to put out their complaints or to navigate their complaints through women they trust. And there are a number of women on Twitter who are doing the very hard work of kind of keeping track of complaints and putting them out where the complainants want anonymity.
[Guest 2]: Raya was doing that as one person. Now, neither of these, as I think Makepeace was pointing out on Twitter, neither of these can claim to be perfect. But they were in themselves movements that tell you about how broken the system is. There is a statement about that as well.
[Guest 2]: And so I feel like Raya kind of set that in motion. And so, for example, even the radical sort of empathy that we were discussing, unfortunately, at that time, we didn't see. And so clearly, there's also still a lot of work for this very, if you would call it a movement or this very space to do in terms of also becoming more inclusive.
[Guest 1]: Can I ask something? I've been wondering, there are many obvious reasons for why the list of shame as Raya Sarkar's list, which came out last year, was called, got less sympathy and less attention than the current wave of accusations.
[Guest 1]: I've been trying to think of why. One of the reasons, as many people have pointed out, is that the degree of anonymity of the accusers in that case was somewhat deeper.
[Guest 1]: Many of the accusers were not only anonymous, but they were also coming from positions of marginality. They were juniors in academia. They were students. They were women who were entirely dependent on men and on institutional power for the jobs and the work that they were doing.
[Guest 1]: Many people have pointed out that because Raya Sarkar is Dalit, there's an element of marginality and a lack of sympathy from upper caste women that's kind of hard coded into how they approach anything she did or said.
[Guest 1]: One of the details that I've been focused on is also that, however, is also the fact that the accused in this round of allegations are just higher profile.
[Guest 1]: And because they're involved in the media and in the creative industries, and because there's a degree of celebrity involved there that, you know, Partha Chatterjee doesn't have for all his fame, this kind of becomes headline news in a way that the list of shame didn't.
[Guest 1]: I'm not trying to find excuses for why we're reacting now differently from the way we reacted then.
[Amit Varma]: I have an observation slash follow up question to that. I mean, one reason could, of course, be just the nature of the industries that was academia versus media. But one thing that has struck me now is that one of the things that drove the anger then from all of these women were that due process isn't working.
[Amit Varma]: That's why we have to do this. And one of the things I've noticed about this current thing, what has happened over the last week is that we actually see due process working in some cases. I don't know whether it's as a consequence of that, but Business Standard fired one reporter, Hindustan Times made the political editor step down.
[Amit Varma]: All India Bakchod has been cancelled by Hotstar. You know, Mami pulled films by Rajat Kapoor from their list. And I know of various other organizations which are taking this kind of action fairly seriously and not as tokenism.
[Guest 2]: But that's actually not necessarily due process, right? Because the I think, in fact, the response to these accusations versus the accusations that came earlier is on the institutions. There was no reason for institutions to not put in place due process. Then it was just easier because the debate became fractured in a way that it became easy to delegitimize Raya's efforts.
[Guest 2]: And I think it's also important to remember that at that point, this was one woman who was also being blamed for all sorts of bizarre things like creating a void within feminists in India, etc., which I personally found rather strange.
[Guest 2]: And Lawrence Liang, for example, there was actually due process that got put in. And that's the one name I remember. I think there were at least there were multiple men that I remember in some institutions either did take action. Sadanand Menon, for example, is a very good example of someone who was on that list.
[Guest 2]: The Institute did not take any action. And finally, a survivor also who had, I think, contributed to the list decided to come out. And now we know that due process hasn't worked. But I don't know if that's on the list itself or on the institutions and the way in which they chose to react then versus the way in which they are choosing to react now.
[Guest 2]: Because even the scale of this is defined by our ready acceptance of this wave of allegations versus the list then. And I think that's as much on us and the institutions more than, you know, just the people who are spearheading the efforts.
[Guest 2]: And of course, I think there have also, I mean, we are now like we were discussing in day six. And, you know, there's also been, for some reason, because of the kind of momentum that has been driven by, for example, institutions taking action or the fact that these are journalists we've read or heard about.
[Guest 2]: And also Tanushree Dutta, I think, who kind of also set things in motion by talking about her experiences with Nana Patekar. It has continued for longer. I'm just not sure if it's the nature of the original efforts themselves or also some of our own prejudices that caused one effort to, you know, really catch momentum while another just sort of got sidelined by all the criticism that was lobbed at it.
[Guest 1]: I think it's absolutely clear that the failure of due process was what instigated the list of shame in the first place. And I think most universities, with some exceptions, behaved shamefully in light of those accusations, refusing to treat them as forget about delegitimizing them.
[Guest 1]: They, you know, they ignored them. They called them ill-informed and vague. I'm quoting exactly from what ACJ said in the case of Sadanand Menon, who was adjunct faculty over there at the time and who not only got the support of his institute, but also of a lot of other influential women, including feminists, who put out a letter saying that, oh, you know, we should be more responsible about these sort of accusations.
[Guest 1]: Well, yes, there is an infrastructure of responsibility, but it was entirely on the institutions who abdicated their role in that responsibility and forced young women to lash out, if you like, in the way they did.
[Guest 1]: Raya and I think her, you know, people who supported her said very clearly that, look, whatever happens, I mean, they were like, look, we're tired. And you should know that if you're entering the halls of academia, that if this guy is like has you on his radar, it's a problem for you.
[Guest 1]: And I, you know, I respect that. I recognize, of course, that there's potential for abuse. And so did everybody involved. But the MeToo movement from the very beginning, I think, over the last year, ever since the Weinstein story came out, has been anarchic in nature.
[Guest 1]: And we've had to take it and roll with it. And for all those who are worried about false accusations, particularly as far as academia were concerned. And I have to say this for those who are worried about false accusations against male academics, like this was your chance to make due process work.
[Guest 1]: If you were worried that the women had violated some kind of boundary, why didn't you let your institutional mechanisms do the work of clearing the names of the men you were concerned about? Very few people did that. And I mean, look, as a result, what we have now is men like Sadanand Menon named on a second list now with multiple accusations of misconduct against him.
[Guest 1]: And, you know, I'm not sure. I feel like our focus should be on the abusers. But I also want to ask the women who publicly backed him to think about what they did and how they hampered the cause of justice.
[Guest 2]: Sorry, I just realized that we misgendered Raya because their preferred pronouns are there in them.
[Guest 1]: Oh, sorry. So apologies for that on behalf of all of us. I'm really sorry. I didn't know that.
[Amit Varma]: Right. We'll take a quick commercial break and then we'll come back and talk about anonymity.
[Unknown]: We are to get more and more people on board this week on Cyrus. Cyrus is joined by Adman and author Ambi Parmesaran.
[Unknown]: Ambi talks about what he learned from the prominent people he has met and also how things will change in the advertising world in the light of the MeToo movement.
[Unknown]: On Croc Tales, listen to two standalone stories by Anand based on the concept of love, lust and relationships.
[Unknown]: On the Pragati Podcast, Pawan and Hamsi talk to the co-founder and editor in chief of the News Minute, Dhanya Rajendran about online journalism and building a digital news platform.
[Unknown]: On The Kinetic Living, Urmi spoke to Nikki Gupta, the owner of the Italian bistro Mia Cucina. Nikki shares her experience of training for the Mount Everest Base Camp and how it changed her perception towards fitness.
[Unknown]: This week, Anugraha Srivastava from Small Case talks to Anupam about all-weather investing and why it's important to investors.
[Unknown]: And with that, let's continue on with the shows.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the Scene in the Unseen. My guests today are Supriya Nair and Nikita Saxena.
[Amit Varma]: One of the issues that you brought up yourself with regard to the last list by Raya Sarkar was that more of those complaints were anonymous.
[Amit Varma]: And that's an objection that people have been raising even now that, you know, what do you do about anonymous complaints?
[Amit Varma]: Anybody can make up anything and put it out there.
[Guest 1]: I know that both that list and this current wave of allegations seems chaotic.
[Guest 1]: But actually, if you think about it, it's there is a structure to it.
[Guest 1]: In the last list, Raya, tremendous risk to themselves, became the conduit and the curator of these accusations.
[Guest 1]: So because they were assuring you that they knew the identity of the accuser, they were in some sense doing what we do in formal institutional settings as well,
[Guest 1]: which is to protect the identity of an accuser in a complaint involving rape or sexual harassment.
[Guest 1]: In this case, we have two or three women on Twitter who through whom these complaints are being aired anonymously when they are anonymous.
[Guest 1]: And I think the discourse has pretty quickly picked up and sensitized itself to good faith in all of these cases.
[Guest 1]: There are reasons for them to trust the women who are putting out these anonymous accounts.
[Guest 1]: And I feel like while we're still evolving our sense of objectivity in these cases, it's not entirely absent.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, it's almost happened in real time in the sense that, you know, we've seen some of the fake allegations happening,
[Amit Varma]: but also the ecosystem has evolved just within the last six days.
[Amit Varma]: And I also know that, OK, if I see like Ritu Ponna's account at Masala Bhai or Sandhya Menon's, I know I can trust them that they're verifying this themselves.
[Amit Varma]: So even if they put out something which is anonymous, they have in some way given it credibility and verified it.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, you can kind of trust those accounts.
[Guest 2]: I mean, which I think was very much the case with Raya's list as well,
[Guest 2]: because they were also doing very much the same work that I imagine people who are putting out complaints on Twitter right now are.
[Guest 2]: And I also, sorry.
[Guest 1]: I think the one thing that this round of allegations has that the List of Shame didn't though is the abundance of screenshots.
[Guest 1]: So the sense that you have something that's not just a name on an Excel sheet,
[Guest 1]: but also a story that you can see that someone has DMed this person that offers you details, that offers you texture.
[Guest 1]: I feel like psychologically that's made a difference to readers.
[Amit Varma]: But does it worry you that people could jump on this bandwagon like over the weekend, for example, starting Sunday night?
[Amit Varma]: You had a flurry of clearly fake accounts by clear sock puppet handles, which were run by somebody's IT cell, which were easily rebutted.
[Amit Varma]: But nevertheless, there is a worry that then people jump on the bandwagon, use a MeToo hashtag, make up anything they want.
[Amit Varma]: How do you deal with that?
[Guest 1]: I'm waiting to see how the element of fake news evolves in this case.
[Guest 1]: What you've described right now, because it's so clearly easily rebutted, makes it clear that just pulling up a couple of sock puppet accounts
[Guest 1]: and deciding to point fingers at someone because you don't like them isn't necessarily going to work.
[Guest 1]: Public trust is more nuanced than that.
[Guest 1]: But I'm interested to think about what the future might hold, though, and how as this conversation evolves, the sophistication of threats against people against whom someone might have an agenda also evolves.
[Guest 2]: Also, I feel like we've kind of been through these concerns again, just to go back to the list.
[Guest 2]: Also, is it the list of sexual harassers in academia or list of shame?
[Unknown]: Oh, sorry, I know it is the list of shame.
[Amit Varma]: What's the distinction?
[Guest 1]: I mean, it's the same acronym. I just am wondering what the full form is.
[Guest 1]: It's called, yeah, it's called hashtag low sharp when people talk about it amongst themselves.
[Guest 2]: So but I thought even with the list, for example, a lot of people at that time, for various reasons, known to them were saying that we don't know if these complaints are actually legitimate because they're anonymized.
[Guest 2]: And at that time, I remember that I knew some people who were far more well versed with the world of academia than I was.
[Guest 2]: And you'd come back and you'd say, oh, OK, this person is on the list, too.
[Guest 2]: And it's of course, we've heard stories about them.
[Guest 2]: And even in this round, like Supriya was pointing out, I feel like at least up until now, of course, it's shocking the spectrum of men who seem to have harmed women. But I haven't seen anything that would worry me in terms of being if it were a fake allegation that to me has matched up to, you know, the hype threads that we hear about destruction of reputations or.
[Guest 1]: I mean, I think we should prepare for efforts like that. I'm just not sure what those efforts would look like.
[Guest 1]: And but maybe there's someone sitting somewhere in some IT cell frantically thinking up ways to get me to believe allegations against against a person I would otherwise rather trust.
[Guest 1]: But it seems like a bit of a long shot at this point.
[Amit Varma]: And a friend of mine, whom I won't name because I haven't taken her permission, obviously, but she's an editor in a major newspaper, told me recently that when the low chalice came out, she was against it because she was worried about due process and presumption of innocence and all of those factors.
[Amit Varma]: But now she is saying she's changed her mind. Now she's saying, let there be collateral damage. This needs to happen.
[Amit Varma]: And I kind of agree with her. But what do you guys feel about that? What is the factor of collateral damage?
[Amit Varma]: Which is, of course, is something that men will stress on.
[Guest 1]: Yeah. An overstate, in my opinion. I think the problems remain with or without collateral damage because they're essentially moral.
[Guest 1]: So if you do worry about, for example, the presumption of innocence and you believe that the same principle that applies in a courtroom should apply in how we relate to each other in public life, then that problem doesn't necessarily go away.
[Guest 1]: And I don't think these allegations or the previous ones change that. But if you look at this as an opportunity to think about drawing distinctions between how institutions can and should process complaints.
[Guest 1]: The reforms that we want to make in culture and society simply by airing out these problems, acknowledging that they're problems and, you know, and discomforting some individuals in the process, then you should see these as a good thing.
[Guest 1]: I agree that it seems unfair. And I'm thinking right now, particularly of a friend of mine who was not accused of abuse, but who admitted to complicity in covering up an episode of abuse and has taken the hit for it professionally.
[Guest 1]: While I have some sympathy for the fact that this one man has suffered for doing something that many men have done, I also recognize that that's where change begins.
[Guest 1]: And because of one person taking the hit, as I said, if it allows more people to introspect about their own behavior and to not make the same mistakes, then I'm prepared for that. You know, I mean, women have been taking hits for a very long time.
[Guest 2]: Sorry, just to jump in, but that last part to me is also something that I'm very curious about, because one of the things that I've noticed tends to happen with the discourse is that we are still centering the men, you know, the men who are going to be affected by the allegations made against them, what kind of apologies they're putting out.
[Guest 2]: And I wonder what it would look like to center what the women have lost, because I fear that the scale of that is so large that it's difficult to talk about what would reparations look like, for example, which is something I think that Rega also pointed out.
[Guest 2]: But it's something that I am deeply interested in, because I do think that what happens is that in these cases, I mean, you're talking about such a large volume of women who have been affected professionally, personally, mentally, emotionally, physically, that we can't, it's difficult for us to fathom what it would look like to start talking about what we do for those women.
[Guest 2]: I mean, what does justice or what does some form of justice look like when you've suffered that much? And one of the interesting aspects to what we were beginning to talk about was men and what happens with collateral damage for men, which I think I'm kind of on board with what Supriya is saying.
[Guest 2]: But for me, I wonder when we can reach a point where we can start talking about what happens to the women who've come out and spoken. I mean, how do we make up for all the lost time?
[Amit Varma]: People talk about the careers of these accused people getting ruined. But what about the women like, you know, Vintananda, for example, whose career ended 19 years ago? And, you know, and how can you then show? I mean, one of the interesting things about this MeToo movement, and maybe I'm being too optimistic about this, but where I think it will work and where I think it will not work. Why are you laughing?
[Amit Varma]: I'm cynical about I'm cynical that is necessarily going to get women justice for what has happened in the past, or that all of the people who have been predators or who have been complicit will be brought brought to account.
[Amit Varma]: What I am optimistic about is that it will change the culture in the future in just something as simple as even if men don't change the way they feel internally, it changes the incentives for their behavior.
[Amit Varma]: So now the next time you are, you know, on a date pushing past someone after they say no for the first time, or the next time you're cracking an inappropriate joke or putting your hand on someone's thigh, you're going to think twice. Earlier you could get away with impunity because you were, you know, you were just being friendly.
[Amit Varma]: And I really do think that's going to change. I think men have to think twice, even if they're thinking twice for the wrong reasons. Hey, what if I get exposed? Even if they're doing it for the wrong reasons, some of that behavior will surely change. Don't you think so?
[Guest 1]: I also think that the behavior of women will change because now, when someone puts their hand on your thigh, instead of normalizing it and keeping your keeping how shaken you feel or how bad you feel about it to yourself, you hopefully you'll now think, but he's not allowed to do that and react and react quicker.
[Guest 1]: And hopefully some of the stories that have taken 20 years to come out won't take 20 years to come out after this. I, I, well, I'm a pessimist of the intellect in this case, but an optimist of the will, to quote Gramsci.
[Guest 1]: One of the things that Nikita's excellent story, I think, crystallizes that is the truth about this culture is that that hashtag times up isn't so much a warning to men as I think it is a call to women.
[Guest 1]: And it's not a call to say that an era has ended, but that our work has just begun and the fight is going to be endless. You only have to read the Pachauri story to realize just why.
[Guest 1]: But hopefully this means more women realize that they have fellow combatants and they're not alone.
[Guest 2]: My worry would just be that, are we also going to see more people calling out problematic behavior that they've witnessed? Because I think the role of a witness in these cases, and it doesn't necessarily have to be an act of physical transgression that you view, but like we were talking about the culture of an office, for example.
[Guest 2]: We haven't even gotten into conversations about gender discrimination with journalism, for example, the different kinds of stories and this, I would like to believe is less true today than it was, say, 10 years ago.
[Guest 2]: But it is still very much a part of the truth, which is the kind of beats that one tends to assign women to or the kind of very masculine understanding we have of being on the field.
[Guest 2]: We haven't even begun to get into those conversations. But even before that, if we are to talk about a culture that's changing and we have to talk about women who feel more empowered to articulate the kind of discomfort we know we've been having for years.
[Guest 2]: I'm also hoping it means that we're able to help others articulate that discomfort as well, because I think a large part of this silence is that we're told silence is status quo.
[Guest 2]: So doing something other than status quo feels strange. So, for example, if Pachauri was picking women up on their birthdays, that was something that everyone could see.
[Guest 2]: And if no one spoke up, then I would think that real change would begin when they start recognizing that as problematic.
[Guest 2]: Or, for example, if there was a man who I knew was very supportive of the complainant, but then started complaining to me about how he could not understand the women not speaking up about Pachauri because, and I remember this verbatim, that men have families to look after.
[Guest 2]: So I get that they're worried about their jobs, but these women, they're just doing the job to buy makeup.
[Guest 2]: And the thought was quite violent from someone who was actually supporting a survivor of sexual harassment. And I hope that along with behavior, the idea that this is a problem for women to deal with also changes, because it's a problem for all of us to deal with.
[Guest 2]: And it cannot be the onus of just, you know, the people from across various sections who are oppressed trying to make it better, because I don't think the work will get done then.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, I think it's significant that in many of the industries where names have been named so far, there's a sense that a kind of open informality, a liberal workplace culture makes a place more humane. It makes it more personal. It allows for creative freedom of some sort.
[Guest 1]: When in fact, all of these are encoded in patterns of domination that are very, very harmful to the people being dominated, most often women, we know that sexual harassment is actually a tool of that inequality, that it's normalized to such a degree that as much as paying women less or keeping them from promotions,
[Guest 1]: just the simple act of humiliating them in a million different ways, you know, allows you to exploit their labor or exploit them as laborers.
[Guest 1]: So if people are saying that, oh, this is going to end all kinds of human and personal interaction and it's not going to be the same and, you know, feminism is going to like segregate us by gender again,
[Guest 1]: or even do the things you mentioned, which is to think twice about the kind of jokes that you're cracking in mixed company, which people will say, oh, that sounds so Edwardian, we used to do that like 100 years ago.
[Guest 1]: You want to send us back to the past? Well, no, not necessarily. But the way to think about it is that if this ushers in a new era of more formal workplace relations,
[Guest 1]: then our worry should not be that those formalities will constrain us. We should be happy that they will hopefully stamp out a kind of inequality that we have refused to acknowledge all this while,
[Guest 1]: and that they in turn will lead to new kinds of equality, which leads to new kinds of freedom.
[Amit Varma]: And I'd say that liberate us not constrain us. And also men also diminish themselves, you know, by being complicit in this.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, and I'd urge all my listeners to just pick up the phone and look at whatever family WhatsApp groups they have.
[Amit Varma]: And look at the last 20 memes or jokes that have been sent there. And tell me how many of them you feel you should object to, but actually don't because hey, you know, why stir up the waters.
[Guest 2]: And I mean, once you get into family systems, you're just talking a different kind of, I think, you know, scale of harassment altogether. Because I was talking about this with one of the women journalists
[Guest 2]: who has also been following what's happening online. And we were just talking about how all of us know or have experienced some discomfort at the hands of a male relative,
[Guest 2]: or, you know, child abuse, which kind of usually we don't talk about, especially if it comes out from extended family members, which is shockingly common.
[Guest 2]: And, sorry to come back to the parallels with the Pachauri story, but I remember one of the things that I did forget to mention is,
[Guest 2]: the other reason he made it so difficult for women to talk was because this idea that Teddy is a family.
[Guest 2]: Your workplace cannot be your family, it should not be compared to a family unit. And if someone does that, that's really problematic, because a family has a patriarch and workplaces don't need patriarchs.
[Guest 2]: When you kind of start internalizing the idea that I cannot air my dirty laundry out in public, I cannot bring a bad name to the workplace I'm with, or I will be harming the cause of climate change,
[Guest 2]: which was an idea that a lot of these women were told. Even after the complaint came out, I remember a horrible piece in the Guardian which tried to suggest that this was some sort of climate skeptic controversy to bring the great man of climate change down.
[Guest 2]: So when you start selling us the idea that, you know, we have to operate as a family, you're bringing in all the problems of a family unit to the workplace.
[Guest 2]: And I find this, that this happens with smaller workplaces a lot, that solidarity somehow is supposed to extend itself to secret keeping, which is unhealthy for your workplace, for your employees.
[Guest 2]: And you know, just for the kind of culture you're developing there. Sorry, I kind of trailed off there.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, no, that's a that's a fantastic point.
[Guest 1]: And if you're a man or a woman who's left your family WhatsApp group, I congratulate you.
[Amit Varma]: I'm kind of addicted to social media. I can't leave anything. All WhatsApp groups for me are like Hotel California.
[Amit Varma]: It's also FOMO, right? What will I miss? The next sexist meme.
[Amit Varma]: Nikita, I also wanted to elaborate on something you mentioned before the show started, which is that some fields, some professions are structurally more conducive to this kind of behavior.
[Guest 2]: I mean, so I can speak from my experience and I am recognizing that I also come from a lot of privilege.
[Guest 2]: So I feel like it may even not be representative of actually how heartbreaking journalism as a field can be.
[Guest 2]: And I was working as a business reporter in Bombay. And I remember that at the time that I shifted to Delhi because I wanted to pursue political journalism,
[Guest 2]: it was almost impossible for me to find an organization that would be willing to take my application seriously because it did not come from a network of patronage.
[Guest 2]: Most media organizations still very recently did not have open application systems.
[Guest 2]: And even now, finding out where there is a vacancy, finding out which person to meet,
[Guest 2]: how you can get the interview and being taken seriously inside the room where the interview is taking place is very much a function of knowing a person who can put a good word in for you.
[Guest 2]: I remember visiting at least six or seven organizations, one of which was a leading newspaper,
[Guest 2]: where I remember being asked as soon as I entered that I don't have journalism experience and how I would negotiate that in the newsroom.
[Guest 2]: And I remember being shocked because the first line on my resume was my journalism experience at the previous organization I'd worked with.
[Guest 2]: And for that, I mean, I do want to acknowledge the caravan because I feel like that process, intensely rigorous as it is,
[Guest 2]: at least gives you a sense that you're playing within a somewhat level field.
[Guest 2]: You know, I was very grateful at that point because it is a long process, the caravan hiring process.
[Guest 2]: But at least by the end of it, I felt like I had a chance to be meeting different kinds of people and to give it my best shot
[Guest 2]: and not be given 500 minutes or not be spoken impatiently to or being told that, you know, we'll get back to you and not being gotten back to.
[Guest 2]: I remember that at the point that I entered the organization, I thought that if this interview doesn't work out,
[Guest 2]: I should just figure out some other career to pursue because it's just becoming untenable and I will not be able to sustain financially like this.
[Guest 2]: And I think that because this network exists, because we're told that it's important to be seen with the right people,
[Guest 2]: to have your byline read by the right people, to be socializing with a certain kind of hierarchy.
[Guest 2]: Journalism lends itself to the secret keeping even more because you have journalists who are doing great work,
[Guest 2]: who are heading great organizations that you do not want to be antagonizing.
[Guest 2]: And because it is a structure within which the void between those entering the field and between those who are at the towering heights of the field is so vast
[Guest 2]: that it's almost unthinkable that you're going to take that kind of machinery on.
[Guest 2]: And I think that it I'm sure it is true of a variety of other fields.
[Guest 2]: The reason it feels particularly hypocritical within journalism is because this is exactly the kind of, you know,
[Guest 2]: idea of holding power accountable is what journalism sustains itself on.
[Guest 2]: But every day is a reiteration of those power structures being enforced within this, you know, field.
[Guest 2]: I don't I don't know if that.
[Guest 1]: No applause. That's I mean, you've that last sentence very clearly articulated the problem with journalism.
[Guest 1]: I think the last few days, if anything, have shown us that journalism is as much about concealing facts and keeping secrets as it is about revealing them.
[Guest 1]: So there's a lot of work to be done for my part. I think that every industry reinforces and reiterates its power structures quite brutally in different ways.
[Guest 1]: The particular way in which journalism and advertising and the entertainment industries do it is by enclosing us in this the sense of personal warmth and personal relations.
[Guest 1]: Everything everything is about having apprentices who in turn have gurus who in turn will give them work.
[Guest 1]: I was talking to a friend of mine who's trying to make a film who told me yesterday something we all know,
[Guest 1]: which is that it doesn't matter if you have the best story and the best script in the world.
[Guest 1]: If you don't have a big man opening a door for you, that door is never going to open.
[Guest 1]: And while all of this may seem like huge structural issues that have very little bearing on what's going on right now in women's DMS.
[Guest 1]: In fact, they are precisely at the heart of what makes it so easy to exploit women and to keep them silent.
[Amit Varma]: So on one hand, the problem of access seems a gender neutral problem that men without access also face.
[Guest 2]: No, I think men get that access more easily. We both were just like, no.
[Amit Varma]: So I said on one hand, yeah, but on the other hand, the problem of access also perpetuates the existing gender balances,
[Amit Varma]: because men are more likely to have that kind of access in the first place. Right.
[Guest 1]: Oh, that's I feel like that's exactly what locker room culture is about.
[Guest 1]: And from everything that we're seeing in the United States right now, it's grotesque that, you know,
[Guest 1]: just being in the right locker rooms can get you some of the most powerful jobs in the land.
[Guest 1]: These may not be completely obvious to us in how they operate in Indian business and politics, maybe even sports.
[Guest 2]: But we know that that's the truth. And I think just again, coming back to journalism as a field, for example,
[Guest 2]: who gets mentored by whom or what kind of reporter do you see as being the person who can just get to the story that is,
[Guest 2]: you know, that you need to get versus a reporter who's going to be more trouble on the field.
[Guest 2]: And by more trouble, I mean, when women go on the field, there are different questions of safety, of comfort, of and by comfort,
[Guest 2]: I mean, the level of comfort one shares with their sources or what kind of equation the sources are going to develop with you versus when it's a man.
[Guest 2]: Essentially, we're also talking about organizations within which old boys clubs still exist or the idea that you could, you know,
[Guest 2]: you will step out for a drink and go to the press club. And that's when a lot of your networks and friendships are formed,
[Guest 2]: which are not necessarily spaces that are very friendly to women or young women.
[Guest 2]: There are also a lot of tropes that move around in these fields. Right.
[Guest 2]: So it's not uncommon, for example, to hear from male journalists or like it's easier for you to get access to this report.
[Guest 2]: Or maybe you found it easier to cover this story. And we know how that guy is with women.
[Guest 2]: I mean, one heard this kind of vocabulary in newsrooms and has been hearing it for very long.
[Guest 2]: So, you know, you'd have to change that thinking to for it to become a more accessible space.
[Guest 2]: Because if and I remember experiencing this particularly in television newsrooms,
[Guest 2]: where I would often wonder if the base idea is that this woman is able to get her scoop before you are because she's a woman.
[Guest 2]: Then when she does get discriminated against for being a woman, why would she come and tell this office?
[Guest 2]: I mean, it seems to create a prohibitive barrier to even speaking about discrimination or sexual harassment,
[Guest 2]: because if I'm being discriminated within the very space in which I'm supposed to report such instances,
[Guest 2]: then there's very little reason for me to have faith that these mechanisms will work.
[Guest 1]: It would be remiss of me not to point out that Nikita's experiences and mine,
[Guest 1]: while they represent a very particular set of challenges, in my experience, are nothing compared to what Dalit, Bahujan and Adivasi journalists face in English language newsrooms.
[Guest 1]: And we haven't even begun to talk about that, which is why so if you've noticed so many Dalit women on Twitter and elsewhere have said,
[Guest 1]: while we stand in solidarity with victims, you have to understand that you've made very little space in your movement for us.
[Guest 1]: And I understand that. And I respect that. And I think that's something we need to introspect about.
[Amit Varma]: Going back to you. And I'm just wondering if this becomes a kind of a vicious cycle here,
[Amit Varma]: because you'd earlier said that women are not considered suitable for certain kinds of assignments.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, you brought up the sort of the accounting a woman has to do whenever she goes to report a story that what should I wear?
[Amit Varma]: Is it OK to have a drink with the guy in the evening if he's a source and blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: And editors can easily then use this to perpetuate the same problem and say, no, no, these are stories you cannot do.
[Amit Varma]: And these are stories only men can do. And it's just a vicious cycle. How do you break that?
[Guest 2]: I mean, luckily, I haven't experienced that so far. At the current organization I'm with, I've been encouraged to go out on every kind of investigation possible.
[Guest 2]: But I can sense that there is a lot of hesitation among women to also bring up the gendered experiences we have,
[Guest 2]: because exactly like you're saying, do I really want to reinforce the idea that it's tougher for me to be out on the field?
[Guest 2]: Because that is true. It's not untrue. What I think needs to change is that institutions need to recognize it not as a problem,
[Guest 2]: but as something that they need to work on together with their reporters.
[Guest 2]: You know, for example, an instance that comes to mind is that it so happened that two of my male colleagues
[Guest 2]: and I were reporting from the same city in three successive months.
[Guest 2]: So by the time I reached there, both of them had already reported on their respective stories in the same city.
[Guest 2]: And they had found a hotel that they thought was, you know, relatively safe.
[Guest 2]: And they suggested the hotel to me. And I remember that the minute I entered the hotel and I shut the door to my room,
[Guest 2]: I realized that it didn't have a latch, you know, and it could be opened with a key, which any person in the hotel also would have access to.
[Guest 2]: And I remember realizing that, of course, they didn't look for the latch.
[Guest 2]: It's the first thing I look for when I enter a hotel room, because the first thought in my head is,
[Guest 2]: I don't want anybody attempting to enter my room at night. I don't I want to be able to let my guard down.
[Guest 2]: And it never is really down. But I think even that minute difference in how you assess a room is different between men and women.
[Guest 2]: And I think it would do all of us well to recognize it and to be able to create spaces where we acknowledge it,
[Guest 2]: because only then can we even think about reaching a place where incidents that lead to less women on the field can be reduced.
[Guest 2]: I mean, if we don't acknowledge it, how can we address it? And I think that is a problem right now.
[Guest 2]: Women are worried about speaking out because you want to be able to get all the assignments, you know, that all the men are getting as well.
[Guest 2]: And I realize that really small things help, too.
[Guest 2]: So, for example, for me, the knowledge that I can reach out to my editors at any point with any kind of problem I'm having on the field has greatly helped,
[Guest 2]: because I'm never told that a problem is too trivial to be brought to their notice. And I don't know if all journalists have that luxury, you know.
[Amit Varma]: You're also relatively lucky to be working in the caravan, which is relatively newer. Those cultures aren't there. It's not like that.
[Guest 1]: I think the caravan has put in its share of hard work in rethinking how power is shaped and distributed.
[Amit Varma]: So, guys, I've taken enough of your time today, so I'd like to sort of end this by asking what seems almost a banal and cliched question.
[Amit Varma]: But to all the people listening to this episode, regardless of gender, whether they're men or they're women, is there something you'd like to say?
[Amit Varma]: Let's say someone who hasn't really been on Twitter, hasn't really followed it to the depth that we have and doesn't have the same understanding of it.
[Guest 1]: If anyone has violated your consent in the workplace or outside, or has done something that you have normalized and justified to yourself as something that you deserve to have happen to you,
[Guest 1]: but that really wasn't, please don't be afraid. The fact that some women have been brave enough to speak out should be an impetus for everyone who has a story to tell
[Guest 1]: and a viewpoint to share on the subject of sexual misconduct, sexual harassment, of this culture of patriarchal misbehavior that we've normalized for so long.
[Guest 1]: Now is your time because you will find solidarity that you have not previously found before.
[Guest 1]: If you are someone who is afraid that you are going to be accused or even falsely accused, please don't be.
[Guest 1]: Please understand that this is a moment of truth and that you have every right to participate in it as much as the rest of us.
[Guest 2]: I think I'd just center this on the women. I feel like I keep coming back to this, but it has really hit me that it is astonishing how exhausting it is for all of us.
[Guest 2]: And if you're someone who's entering this space now, there's a fair warning that it's cathartic and it's empowering, but it's also very triggering and very exhausting.
[Guest 2]: So keep your support systems near you and, you know, don't forget to remember that it's okay to switch off when you want to,
[Guest 2]: because I think what we're looking at is also a collective sort of purge and it's as tough as it is, you know, hopeful for all of us involved, I think.
[Amit Varma]: Nikita and Supriya, thank you so much for coming on The Scene and The Unseen. I learned a lot from you.
[Guest 1]: Thank you very much, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Before I end this episode, I want to play a clip from an earlier episode of The Scene and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Two weeks ago, we released an episode called Metrics of Empowerment, in which my guests were Devika Kher, Nidhi Gupta and Hamsini Hariharan.
[Amit Varma]: When the MeToo moment broke last week, Hamsini decided to speak out against a man who had assaulted her a few years ago.
[Amit Varma]: Other women joined in and reached out to her. And like many other brave and generous women online, she became a fulcrum for those complaints,
[Amit Varma]: sifting through them, giving them comfort and helping them speak out. And as she did this, my mind went to that episode that ran with her just a week before that,
[Amit Varma]: when I asked my guests whether they felt more hope or despair about the progress women in India were making.
[Amit Varma]: Devika and Nidhi felt that things were moving in the right direction and they felt hope. But Hamsini said that she despaired.
[Amit Varma]: She said it with a smile at the time and we all laughed. But later, when my producer Swati sent me the recording of the episode and I heard it again,
[Amit Varma]: I sat up straight in my chair when I heard her answer and wondered how I could have missed it at the time.
[Amit Varma]: I've taken Hamsini's permission to say this and I'd like to end this episode by playing her answer again.
[Unknown]: I despair. I do. I'll tell you what, a friend of mine and I were talking and he said, you know, if you could live in any century before this, when would you live?
[Unknown]: And I said, are you crazy? As a woman, why would I want to live in any century before this?
[Unknown]: This is the best time to live, you know, technologically than ever before.
[Unknown]: And if I had to live earlier as a woman, it would simply be worse.
[Unknown]: But just because our time now is better than earlier doesn't mean it's a good time to live.
[Unknown]: Just because we're more equal now than we were 20 years ago doesn't mean we're equal. We're not.
[Unknown]: And this goes beyond equality in what I see as you may win this battle, but you have to fight another one.
[Unknown]: The way I look at women's issues often is that you're just constantly fighting till you figure out what you want and how to get that and not worry about other things.
[Unknown]: Because your bandwidth as a human being is limited. And after a while, you're just angry at the world for taking so much away from you.
[Unknown]: So I would like to believe in a world where we're moving towards parity.
[Amit Varma]: But I also know that this is not something that will be achievable in any of our lifetimes.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: So we've got stuff to say.
[Unknown]: IBM Daily is the name of the show.
[Unknown]: Monday to Friday, we're ready to go.
[Unknown]: Talking about stuff in our head.
[Unknown]: We might even talk about our favorite bread.
[Unknown]: Signing out, it's IBM here, the podcast network that's in your ear.
[Unknown]: Catch IBM Daily Monday to Friday on the IBM podcast app or wherever you get your podcast.
[Unknown]: Who said healthy food is boring?
[Unknown]: Who said raw veggies is just salads?
[Unknown]: Who said eating fats makes you fat?
[Unknown]: On healthy food and exercise hacks on the kinetic living podcast with me, Coach Urmi, every Wednesday on the IBM app website and anywhere you get your podcast from.